Underway.
Yeah. Start. Right, underway. Excellent.
Well, thank you, Minister. Welcome back, and we have 15 minutes with you on this
one if you want to kick it off.
Great. So the Oversight of Oranga Tamariki System Legislation Amendment
Act 2025 gained assent in June of 2025 and
came into force on the 1st of August 2025.
This, of course, honored my commitment to make the Independent Children's Monitor
an independent Crown entity,
that is now governed by a board. Three members include Chair, Dr
Ange Jury, Murray Edridge, and Jo Goodhew.
And the monitor enjoys greater independence from the government in delivering this
important role, which is, of course, oversight of the Oranga Tamariki system.
The monitor has supplied me with its draft support statement of
performance expectations for the '26, '27
year in May this year in line with the accountability requirements of the
Crown Entities Act. Beyond this accountability role
that I hold as a responsible minister, it would be inappropriate for me to
speak on behalf of the monitor's performance.
So I'm going to hand over to Aaron Jones, who is the Chief Executive.
But I also want to introduce Jenna Pollard, who is the Acting General Manager of
Corporate Strategy and Insights.
Thank you very much.
Okay.
Welcome.
I actually have a bit of statement. I thought we'd just go straight into questions.
But if we're looking forward into the next financial year,
the maturity of the monitor, we're shifting slightly in terms of our approach.
We've spent the last three years monitoring the whole of the Oranga Tamariki
system. We've been around the country listening to the voices of young people,
caregivers, whanau and professionals, and we now
know what we know from having done that.
We have a good understanding of how the system is performing.
We now have the potential to go a bit deeper.
So what we have, and are looking for in the next three years, is
taking specific focus areas into our monitoring,
starting with our visit to Tamaki coming up in the next couple of months.
So in Tamaki, you'll see us focusing on access to education,
how well are schools of education supporting tamariki that are known to
Oranga Tamariki to be engaged with and stay in
education. We are also looking at, across the Care
Standards, Oranga Tamariki have rolled out their new practice approach.
So we'll be looking at that closely in terms of what benefits that bring in, and in
particular, whether we're seeing an improvement in compliance with the Care
Standards.
There'll also be interest areas, in particular rohe, that we'll also focus on,
but that's going to be our focus areas for Tamaki.
The intention of that is to dive deep and provide greater insight into terms of
what is working well and what is getting in the way.
So our reports will become a bit more focused.
It doesn't mean to say we're going to be taking our eyes off the things that we've
looked at in the past. Our data,
and evidence that we're gathering from agencies will remain, so we'll continue to
focus on that, but you'll just start to see a slight shift in the way that we
report. The other big opportunity coming up in the next year is
our first three-year report on the whole of the system.
And so, what we have started talking to the chief executives of the
children's agencies about that report.
Our intention is to go back and look at the work that was done by the expert panel
10 years ago. This is the work that was done that established Oranga
Tamariki, that set out some objectives in terms of how the
system would respond. We plan to go back and look
at what change has occurred in the 10 years
and talk to agencies and others in the community about what has been
successful to move forward, but ultimately, what has prevented progress.
So that as we move forward with strategies and plans, we ensure that
we are learning from those
issues and making sure that we don't repeat them.
So you'll see that in our first three-year report, and it will be published
around this time next year.
Thank you. Appreciate the data.
Thank you.
Welcome back, Minister.
I'm interested to understand
those key priorities in more detail for the children's monitor,
for the coming year and how you will implement them.
So we have our statement of intent, which is about to be published.
We have three key outcomes we've identified.
Those are trust,
partnership and positive change.
So to do our work well, we have to have the trust of both government
agencies as well as communities, and so ensuring that our
work can be relied upon, that we are using the very best information we
can access.
And we have gone through and reviewed our qualitative practice,
and so we're making some changes to that.
It's not a major change, but just improving that.
We've relied on expert voices to help us to improve the way that
we manage our qualitative information. So that's part of building trust.
If we don't have that, then our information won't be used in the way that we would
hope. Partnership, the second part, working alongside.
Monitoring doesn't have to be done at distance.
We can work alongside agencies and communities.
We have good, strong partnerships right through our communities.
We have open doors where we go. We want to make sure that continues.
A really good example of where partnership is perhaps moving forward, we
recently did a-
Online seminar or discussion with Oranga Tamariki staff on our
outcomes for Māori report. We had over 800 Oranga Tamariki staff
join that session.
Mm.
We led it out alongside Amanda Marlory, the Chief Executive of Oranga
Tamariki. So side by side, she was able to answer questions
from her kaimahi, as we were about our work.
That was a sign of the partnership and wanting to use the information in our
reports to drive improved practice.
The last of those is positive change, and this has been something that's been a
challenge of not just us, but all monitoring agencies, is how do you affect
the change when you-
Yeah
... agencies are accountable. We've talked about this in the past.
Mm.
It's about what are your teeth. I would like to think that it is the sustained
monitoring that is starting to see change occur.
The Patasi work that we have done, the follow-up the second time,
government accepting all recommendations.
We now have a hub
in the national contact center. We have improved training on
identifying harm in our communities.
Those are some of the things we can point to in terms of influence.
But we continue to look at opportunities to grow that, again, to make
use of the stories, the voices, and the data that is ready for there in our
reports.
So supplementary, and are you confident that the organization has the
capability and the expertise for that, or will you have to scale something up
to
undertake the extra monitoring responsibilities?
We have to be nimble. So we have a forward work program in terms of the communities
and the work we're going to do that fully engages us in our monitoring activities,
as well as the analysis that we do behind the scenes.
Of course, there could be things that occur during the year that would require us
to pivot.
But I think us shifting to a more focused monitoring approach
supports the ability to be nimble.
We're not trying to do everything across everything, but being more focused gives
us that flexibility.
We are also looking at improving our technology.
We've started to look at the use of AI, although we are doing that
particularly cautiously. We're not an organization that has
repeatable processes, which is where you can get real benefits from the use of AI.
Yeah.
And we also need to handle information with the utmost care,
considering these are the voices of some of the most vulnerable people in New
Zealand. So we're just starting to look at that in terms of efficiencies.
But again, my answer is we are a nimble organization.
We've managed to transform from departmental agency to crown
entity. We know we can do it, so can deal with challenges as they come.
Great. Thank you.
Supplementary, Helen.
I was going to ask about that partnership
string,
particularly about the Center for the Prevention of
Family Violence and Sexual Violence.
How much
collaboration is possible
in that space, given the overlap of
need?
So, and our monitoring won't change.
So when we're in communities, we are hearing about the work that's
being done, both in family violence, but also in terms of issues that are
affecting tamariki directly. So we know that there are a range
of tables in communities
where collaboration occurs. Some of those are more successful
than others. What we know, and in terms of our Patasi report,
we talked about, as Dame Karen did, about the need for
standardized models through the country
to make sure that these are as efficient as possible and ultimately to make sure
that action occurs once need has been identified.
So that's an ongoing challenge. I know the center's been looking at that as a work
program. Our role is to continue to see what change might be occurring.
And so is it happening, and that's what we'll see in our reports-
Yeah
... like we did with the Patasi work.
Supplementary, Caroline.
Thank you.
So just talking about the Karen Patasi work, and it's
great that they're going to be
worked on. I see that there's five agencies that have part of the vote,
and
that leaves the question of who is actually the lead agency, who is going to be
responsible for the outcomes and reporting on that.
And I know that, for example,
when you were moved into a crown entity, that
the minister put in a requirement that there
would be a report back on any action within four months.
But say Health New Zealand, who is also one of those five agencies,
doesn't have that same statutory requirement.
So do you know who is going to be leading that work and who will be
responsible for the outcomes over those five agencies?
I think this is what perhaps you're pointing to, Caroline, is one of the issues
we may want to talk about in the three-year report, which is the
issue of successful collaboration and how is it achieved and
leadership within the sector. But I think what the team
at the contact center are learning is it's an incubator for
collaboration. And so they are understanding some of the barriers
to collaboration and how to get across them in real-time, which is
positive. The question is the learnings that are taken from that incubator,
how can they be moved out more broadly?
Because it's to be remembered that it's actually a small number of tamariki that
are coming through that hub. But it's a start.
And I think leadership,
sector leadership, and accountability may be one of the things that we certainly
want to look at in our three-year report.
Sorry.
One more question, just following up on that.
So is there at the moment a lead
agency who is responsible for the outcomes or at least
reporting back within a reasonable timeframe
and
is there meetings set up regularly or
to
go over these things?
Yeah. So we're getting regular briefings from the Ministry of Social Development
as the lead agency, and that's who we're working with in terms of coordinating
visits up to the hub. So we're working through them, and they coordinate us out.
So again, with-
Taking back to the work we're doing on the three-year report.
We're working through MSD in terms of coordination with the sector agencies
as well.
Supplementary, Morgan.
I'm not sure if this is a supplement or a new question.
Might be.
But it relies-
Oh, go for it.
It relates to-
Are you listening?
... the outcomes that Kahurangi's raised.
Minister, it might not surprise you to understand that outcomes are very
important to us.
But I
don't understand how the Independent Children's
Monitor is actually going to improve outcomes for our most
vulnerable children. So can you relay
how that's actually going to work on the ground-
Yeah
... and make improvements in the outcomes for those kids?
That's right. So we're not responsible for the delivery of services, nor are the
agencies accountable to us. So that is the challenge.
Our role in driving improved performance of the system, and
ultimately delivering better outcomes for children, is through our monitoring
and through our regular reporting.
So what you saw in our most recent Outcomes for Māori report was putting
down and setting out the outcomes at ages 18,
25, and out to 30. And so it's through the continually
visiting those outcomes to see whether they are improving,
understanding the reasons why they may or may not be, putting them into our
reports so agencies can make use of them.
So there's a phrase of what gets measured gets done.
Right.
And so I'd like to think this increased measurement and accountability will drive
improvement within the system.
So it's shining daylight on the performance is what you're saying. Okay.
Supplementary, Bridget.
Yeah. Thank you, and thank you for your most recent report.
It's been helpful for us with the work that we're doing.
Can you tell me whether the Independent Children's Monitor will have a
specific role in terms of the Dame Karen
Patasi response,
and the significant appropriation that has been given to that, and what is
that role?
So I think,
in our Dame Karen Patasi, our second report, we looked at both the
recommendations, which are largely focused on identification of harm, so
that the system can then take action.
The second part of our report was about how does the front door respond
when it's aware that there might be a child that's in harm's way.
And so what we've planned to do is continue to focus on that
front door, so quite broadly. So we'll be interested in terms of the change that's
occurring as a result of improved education in the system, improved
education around information sharing, as well as the hub itself.
But also we'll keep a focus on what is the response.
How is the system responding when
they are getting notification of concerns.
So in our Dame Karen Patasi report, we found that it's approximately half of
reports of concern are responded to.
The other half become no further action.
And so the challenge in that report is how can the system do better at
responding to a greater number of reports of concern to
get eyes on the child, to put help in place for whanau,
so that you don't get repeated reports of concern, you don't get
young people turning up in youth justice with 10 or more reports of concern in
a care
area.
So we will continue to focus on that because it's a critical part of the system,
and therefore a critical part of our work.
So we had an exchange-
Thank you. We are at time on this one now.
Oh, okay.
So thank you, Aaron,
for appearing in front us. And now, Minister, we're asking you to switch hats.
In order to hear some officials who-
Thank you. Kahurangi.
Yes.
The part of the question you asked, if you look at the
MSD hearing-
Great
... you'll hear an answer to that.
Excellent. Thank you so much.
And that gives my clarification.
Thank you.
Thanks.
We are over time.
It's like one of these.
It was. There's an island that's got...
Research it.
Mm-hmm.
We have officials coming up.
Oh, good
Thank you, Minister. We're now moving to another hat with the
Minister for Voluntary and Community Sector with, responsibility-
Yeah, no
... for the Corporation of the Department of Internal Affairs.
Right.
So, over to you, Anna. Over to you to kick it off.
Thank you very much for that.
Today with me from the Department of Internal Affairs is Hoani
Lambert, who is the Acting Secretary for Internal Affairs.
The community and voluntary sector both play a vital role in New Zealand's social
and economic wellbeing, contributing over $4
billion to our economy. We've got around
115,000 not-for-profit organizations, including
29,000 of which are registered charities, and
they manage over $27 billion in annual income.
And we know that this sector touches the lives of many New Zealanders every
day. Over half of New Zealanders volunteer their
time, energy, and skills,
and that generosity is very much what makes our communities as strong as
they are.
My key priorities are to encourage and grow philanthropic giving and to remove
regulatory barriers, particularly for small and volunteer-led
organizations.
It is the big shout-out month of June, and this week
is National Volunteer Week. So I just want to thank all the members of
Parliament who I know spend a lot of time acknowledging the enormous work
of volunteers in their communities.
Also this year is the United Nations International Year of the Volunteer,
and we know that every day volunteers make a real difference across our
communities. So by recognizing and valuing them, we encourage more people
to give their skills and time.
The government continues to support the sector through Crown-funded initiatives,
ensuring community grants and funding are targeted for maximum impact.
An important part of my job is also to work closely with business and community to
understand their needs so that we ensure Crown funding is going to where it's
needed the most. We do know we can have the best impact when government,
business, and community are aligned.
I'm keen to see the contributions that people make, efficiently reaching
communities and having the largest impact on their communities.
Growing giving is another priority.
As I said,
one area of focus is exploring payroll giving to make it easier for
people to give. And also, we are behind countries like the US
and the UK in terms of charitable bequests.
So I'm looking at how we can encourage more people to
give charitable gifts in their wills.
The public expects and deserves a charity sector that's free of
fraud and mismanagement. So I've encouraged timely
and efficient decision-making
in the charitable sector space.
With that, I will answer any questions you have.
Thank you, Minister. Great to be hearing this on
Volunteer Week.
Yes, indeed.
Perfect timing.
It is perfect timing. Shout out to everyone out there.
Helen, I think you had a question.
Thank you. I do.
I, first of all, want to do exactly the same thing, acknowledge the
enormous value of the work of our
charitable
sector and our volunteers.
But in the
Budget Week, we had something go through urgency.
That was a change in tax settings
so that anyone who
gave more than $100,000 didn't get the tax
rebate anymore. And I had a lot
of philanthropic organizations contact me.
There's a lot of small donors, but they're actually going down at the
moment because things are tough out there.
And those big donors are vital, particularly
to some organizations.
And those donors, I am told, will just restructure things
so they go through the charity structures in Australia,
for example. If you're giving over $100,000, you've kind of got that
capacity to do. What I heard from you last time,
Minister, was that you knew that in this area, we needed a
strategy around philanthropy, and what
I'm getting the feedback from the sector was this came
absolutely out of the blue. It knocks them for six, and they
don't feel they have a strategy around philanthropy.
In fact, they feel kicked.
Would you like to talk about that?
Yeah. So, obviously, the important policy that the
Minister of Revenue introduced in the budget is to
get the balance right in ensuring that people can't organize
their affairs in a way that
gets around tax rules.
And there was concern
about some organizations that-
Yes
... were not behaving appropriately.
And one of the things that I think is really important in terms of growing
philanthropic giving is people having the confidence
that the system has integrity and that there are checks and balances in place.
The donors that give over $100,000, the analysis
from Inland Revenue was that it would affect 350
donors, which is not a large number.
And while some of them may make different decisions,
most of the donors that I've met in that category, they're not making
donations for the tax rebate. They're making donations because they want
to see the charitable work of that organization
progress.
There's two other changes that are proposed that didn't really get any air time
that I wanted to put on the record.
The first is that donors from the
1st of April '28 will be able to claim their tax
refund during the year and have it paid
directly to the charity through Inland
Revenue. So from that stage, it means that
somebody's made a donation,
they get a tax rebate. They can say straight away
at the time they've made it, "I want my refund to be given
back to the organization that I've donated to in the first place." So
actually, in terms of growing giving, that'll be a really effective tool,
and it'll mean it gets the money out the door faster.
The other one is increasing the tax-free threshold for
not-for-profits from $1,000 to $10,000.
So for many of our communities, we have lots of those very
small not-for-profits, and that lift from
$1,000 to $10,000 will be significant.
So we believe what we have
laid out in terms of, and as I say, it's under the purview of the Minister
of Revenue,
a balanced set of changes that both ensure there is
integrity in the system, that people who are giving are confident that
they are giving,
and it is getting to the charitable organization.
And equally, we are making it easier for those smaller organizations to
operate as well.
If-- Sorry, can I ask this?
Sure.
So
if those people that I've spoken to who are good people, they're
smart people, they're doing things for the right reasons.
They're experts in this area. If they're right, and this means that we get a
plunge in those kinds of donations, and it
kills off some
organizations and plunges the
amount that is given in
charitable donations.
What are the mechanisms by which you will revisit this, given you didn't
consult with that sector? Remember last budget
There was an announcement that there were going to be changes to the charitable
sector, and it turned out none of them were a good idea,
and they were withdrawn from. So consultation matters in this
area because it is an area of expertise.
Yeah. Well, as I said, like you, I have spoken with many donors
who donate in this
area,
and they would be the first people to tell you they don't donate to the cause for a
tax rebate. They donate to the cause because they believe-
That doesn't really answer my question
... in the cause. So look, there are a few people who have said
there may be
an impact in giving. We'll keep an eye on that.
But equally, there have been
messages from others on both sides of the argument that say this was
much needed.
And if you think back to 2008, I think the donation level was
1,800. So for it to be 100,000 is quite significant,
and not something that I think we should be concerned about.
Can I ask you just-
We've got Nikesh in the morning.
Don't I usually get two subs?
Well, we don't have much time.
Okay.
Well, mine's only a quick one though.
Minister,
I think all of us will agree that our voluntary community organizations
are becoming time poor. And it does put
a strain on our volunteers. So,
I'd be keen to know about... Because a lot of them
won't join up with voluntary organizations because of the red tape and regulation
et cetera.
Mm.
So can you give us some reassurance that there will be an
easing of a burden on our volunteer organizations?
Yeah. So that one that I just mentioned in terms of the tax-free threshold-
Yeah
... for not-for-profits, lifting that from 1 to 10,000 is one
example.
It's interesting because, at a number of volunteer events I've
attended over the last couple of weeks,
organizations will refer to
legislation that's been passed
for a significant reason, like the anti-money laundering-
Yes
... that has a disproportionate impact
on our charitable organizations.
So,
the first thing is I'm collecting the areas that do
cause a regulatory burden.
But then it's also having a look at when new legislation
is passed, having a very clear think about
what is the impact on smaller volunteer or
charitable organizations.
And without going into detail, I'll give one example.
There's legislation that, or policy work that
has been around both parliaments around
retirement acts, the retirement legislation.
There's big commercials,
and there are small private, and there are small community
not-for-profit ones.
Mm.
So I do think there is a responsibility on Parliament,
when making laws to consider the impacts across the
board, because sometimes the
impact is disproportionate. Another example that was raised with me
recently was
directors' responsibility.
Mm.
And so if you're a small charitable organization,
it's putting people off becoming a director.
So, there's a balance there. We do have to ensure that we
have great people who are volunteering for our organizations, who have the right
skills and capabilities. But I think there's
opportunities to look at some of them,
and say, "Did we get it right?"
Bank accounts is another one.
Well, that's the AML-
I know, but personally-
... is significant
... I've just spent with a volunteer organization on three months trying to
open a bank account.
Yeah.
For an existing organization.
It's a nightmare.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Totally.
Just in terms of the overall sort of voluntary community sector across the
country, there's been anecdotal evidence, I've been told, that
there's sort of a drop in the number of volunteers across a range of sort of
organizations. Is that feedback something you're hearing
systemically?
Yeah. So Volunteering New Zealand did a state of
volunteering report, state of the decade.
So, while we've still got over 50% of New Zealand's volunteering,
they did consider a few challenges.
One is the demographics,
so it is harder to get younger people to volunteer.
So part of it is thinking differently about how is it that
perhaps instead of giving time, they can give skills.
And there's great organizations out there who instead of donating time,
donate their skills.
And businesses can do that as well.
So I think of an organization in West Auckland that's in
food rescue,
and the business two doors along provides their HR services.
Mm.
So,
it is a business volunteering their resources
to a community organization that would otherwise have to pay for it.
So that's where I think we will see shifts and
changes in volunteering. Another of the
areas that they identified was
the use of technology,
and the need for volunteer organizations to increase their use of
technology
to reduce some of the real kind of administrative burden
that volunteer organizations have to do.
And also the, because of privacy and
things like that,
smaller organizations might be taking risks
with people's names and data and firing spreadsheets around
with people's contact details and roster
information.
So there's an opportunity and a challenge in technology
for volunteer organizations that I'm actively looking at as the
minister
I just might precise that quick stuff on just that issue around
technology or the opportunity maybe around technology.
And just I'm interested in how that intersects with these things like, let's say,
the community organization grant scheme category, which has got benefits to
communities as sort of the measurement, how it's reported, et cetera,
and how that might be better or more easily delivered by
community organizations. So the interplay of information between
the ministry and between these organizations.
Yeah. I definitely think there's opportunities there.
Again, many small organizations, community and voluntary organizations,
would complain about the amount of time it takes for them to report on
their impacts. And actually, I was with an organization just yesterday
who said, "We do not want any government funding,
because we don't want the hassle of kind of
reporting back around what it was for." And that's a
valid choice and a choice that many organizations will make.
But in terms of using technology to make that reporting easier, more
efficient, and more effective,
an area that needs more work.
Honour you.
I have. Just about the issue of what plan
is in terms of philanthropy. We have this enormous opportunity with
people at the present time getting to the point where
they are making their wills, and they are the baby boomers.
What are we doing about making sure that people know that
they should be making bequests as part of their wills?
Australia's done really good work in this way. It's these low-hanging fruits.
Yeah. And I mentioned that in my opening comments, because we are
significantly behind the US and the UK.
And we do know that we are entering
a decade or two of an intergenerational wealth transfer.
So it is really important that we worked with the sector
to profile the opportunity for people
to give bequests in their wills.
And if you think about some of the
organizations around the country
that have set up in recent years, they're very much
targeting.
I think of Geyser Foundation, for example, that covers
Rotorua and Taupō,
people to bequest in their wills for particular
purposes. So it might be that you can say in your will,
"I'm giving $200,000, and I want that focused
on
palliative care for children in Taupō." Right?
So you can be quite specific. And I've seen growth in
that area. But there's a lot more for us to do working with the
sector to ensure that that is top of mind when people are doing their
wills.
As a supplementary on that, because I'm certainly aware of the
US sort of... And fortunate probably in my region to have some people from
there who understand this.
But what role does government have in working with the sector
to help, I guess, systemize or maybe
provide them with adequate information, how to establish a mechanism to take
up that opportunity with the bequests?
Because there is that intergenerational wealth that we're sort of looking at over
the next couple of decades.
Yeah. So we work closely with Philanthropy New Zealand.
I've had meetings over the years with the big kind of
providers and community trusts.
And it's really them looking at what are the ways that we can promote
the use of wills and increase bequests.
And if you think about the 12
Days of Giving campaigns I've run for the last two years at Christmas time,
it's been able to profile different ways of giving.
Wills are one, payroll giving is another.
Regular weekly giving is an important
opportunity. So I think that's another important way to just to
profile. But we do and will continue to work really closely with
Philanthropy New Zealand as the main organization who
does this.
Thank you very much. We are at time, so thank you very much again for a very-
Great
... fine.
Thank you. And I'll see you a bit later on.
Appreciate it.